# Prosper Loan Data Analysis
## by Deepak Sithu


## Dataset

> This project is an examination of loan data from Prosper. The data set provided holds information for 113,937 loans with 81 variables for each loan. This includes information including the loan amount, borrower rate, the status of the loan, and other information about the loan and the borrower. This project will focus on about ten to 15 of these variables and look into what factors affect the credit rating of a loan and the borrower's APR. The project will be structured by first having an initial exploration into the dataset to look into the features of note and to find any problems which will need to be resolved. Then there will be a data cleaning portion where the dataset will be formatted for quality and tidiness issues for better use through the rest of the report. This will be followed by sections on univariate, bivariate, and finally multivariate exploration of the dataset.


## Summary of Findings

> In the univariate exploration section of the project it was found that there were some significant differences between the breakdown of CreditRatings in the pre-July 2009 portion of the dataset, where the credit ratings of loans were made by CreditGrades, versus the post-July 2009 section where the ratings were made by ProsperRatings. It was found that while the highest count of listings were in the 'C' range, that there was a noticeable drop in the proportion of 'AA' ratings after the switch to ProsperRatings. It was also found that the BorrowerAPR rate had a right skewed distribution with a large spike at the mode of 0.35797, which is likely a default value for certain listings. It was also notable that this value only became the mode after the switch to ProsperRatings as well. For the Term variable, it was found that while the majority of loans were for 36 months, with the less populous options being 12 or 60 months, that prior to the switch to ProsperRatings there actually were only 36 month loans. There were other, relatively minor differences found between the CreditGrades and ProsperRating data, such as a significant amount of the CreditGrade data for the factor of IncomeRange having 'not displayed' as the value, and for the factor of ListingCategory having 'not available' as the value.

> In the bivariate exploration section of the project it was found that the trend of listings being most commonly in the 'C' rating was true for both 36 and 60 month listings, but that there were not enough 12 month listings to have any clear visible trend among them. In addition, listings rated as 'NC' tended to have many values that aligned with the common 'C' rating, such as their APR. There was also found to be a relationship between the credit rating of a loan and whether the loan was for a homeowner. The lower the crating the less likely the loan was for a homeowner, but then at the 'C' rating the likelihood was nearly equal, and then at the higher ratings it was more likely that the loan was for a homeowner, which suggested a potential relationship between homeownership and higher credit ratings. There was some noticeable differences with the CreditGrade data from the overall dataset, where there was a trend in increasing numbers of loans for nonhomeowners going down in credit ratings, with the number peaking at the 'D' rating. This trend was the opposite for homeowners, where there was an increasing number of loans for them going up in the ratings, peaking at 'AA'. This trend was not visible in the overall dataset or in the ProsperRating-specific data, again suggesting some kind of change in either the loan process or the kinds of loans which were accepted at the time the switch to ProsperRatings occurred. 

> Also in the bivariate section it was also found that there didn't seem to be any strong correlation between the number of current of seven year lines of credit an individual had and their credit rating. This was surprising because it seemed plausible that having very few or many lines of credit would have implications about the financial stability of an individual. There was also a trend for loans which were past due, and past due by greater lengths of time, having higher APRs. There was also interestingly not a significant difference in APRs based on income. APRs seemed to be slightly lower for homeowners, but this trend was not very significant as the whiskered bar chart included large standard deviation whiskers. While it was found that the factors of BorrowerRate and BorrowerAPR were so tightly correlated that they were likely two measures of a similar or the same factor, this was not found with the variables of OpenCreditLines and TotalCreditLinespast7years. The later factors had much more of a spread in their relationship as seen in a scatter plot.

> In the multivariate exploration section of the project it was found that there was a notable change in the distribution of APRs across credit ratings before and after the switch to ProsperRatings over CreditGrades. In the later, ProsperRating, data there were much tighter ranges of borrower APRs for loans within each credit rating, while there was previously a much wide distribution before the change. This again suggested some change around July 2009 during this shift that changed the listing process. There was also some data which conflicted with prior findings, where breaking down APRs by both CreditRating and whether a borrower was a homeowner found that, while APRs were slightly lower for homeowner in general, within each CreditRating APRs were slightly higher for homeowners compared to non-homeowners. There was also found to be a notable rise in the APRs for higher risk loans in the post-July 2009 portion of the data. Finally, there was an interesting deviation in the general trend for APRs when broken down by income and credit rating, where the APR generally could be predicted by the CreditRating except for people with incomes of $0, which tended to have relatively lower APRs for low-rated loans and higher APRs for high-rated loans.


## Key Insights for Presentation

> The first trend to note for the presentation is the shift in the data when comparing the pre- and post-July 2009 data. The first was the shifts in the APR before and after, where although APR largely aligned with the credit rating of a loan, there was a much larger range of APRs for pre-July 2009 listings compared to the later ones. It was also found that in the post-July 2009 data there was a significant increase in the mean APR for higher risk loans compared to before.

> There were also many interesting shifts in the trends of loans for homeowners or non-homeowners during this transition. While it was found that APRs were in general, slightly lower for homeowners compared to non-homeowners, when that data was broken down by credit ratings it was actually found that, for each credit rating, homeowners had slightly higher APRS than non-homeowners.  
